# Authentication

The user will enter their login credentials into a form, a request is sent with these credentials to the server, on the server, we validate this data against our database, then send back a response indicating whether the authentication was successful.

Once authenticated, the user can access protected routes and submit requests to endpoints on our server requiring authentication.

There are two common approaches for this: server-side sessions and authentication tokens.

## Server-Side Sessions

In this case, a unique identifier (e.g., session id) is stored on our server and sent to the client when their credentials are verified. The client then sends this identifier along with their requests to access protected resources. Typically, this is stored in a cookie.

## Authentication Tokens

The idea here is that the server does not create an identifiers and store them. Instead, the server creates and signs tokens, which are sent to the client and can be used to request protected resources.

Although the server doesn't store these tokens, it can determine how it signed the token.

## Single Page Applications

Typically, SPAs work with tokens instead of sessions. The most common form of authentication token used are JSON Web Tokens (JWT).

JWTs are generated from three main building blocks: (1) issuer data, added to the token by the server when it is generated, typically automatically by a third-party library; (2) custom data, such as user data; and (3) a secret signing key generated by the server
